http://www.correntewire.com/russell_brand_vs_jeremy_paxman_the_full_transcript

Russell Brand, who are you to edit a political magazine?

But is it true you don’t even vote?

Well, how do you have any authority to talk about politics then?

They being?

Here’s the thing you shouldn’t do. Shouldn’t destroy the planet, shouldn’t
create massive economic disparity, shouldn’t ignore the needs of the people.
How do you imagine that people get power?

They get power by being voted in, that’s how they get power.

You can’t even be asked to vote.

In a democracy, that’s how it works.

No, I’m not saying that. I’m saying if you can’t be asked to
vote, why should we be asked to listen to your political point of view?

Well, why don’t you change it then?

Well, why don’t you start by voting?

When did you last vote?

You’ve never, ever voted?

So you struck an attitude, what, before the age of 18?

Well, I was busy being a drug addict at that point, because I come from the kind
of social conditions that are exacerbated by an indifferent system that really
just administrates for large corporations and ignores the population that it was
voted in to serve.
You’re blaming the political class for the fact that you had a
drug problem?

Well of course it doesn’t work for them if they didn’t bother to
vote.

Yeah, there is –

You don’t believe in democracy. You want a revolution don’t you?

The planet is being destroyed, we are creating an underclass, we’re exploiting
poor people all over the world, and the genuine legitimate problems of the
people are not being addressed by our political class.
All of those things may be true.

But you took – I wouldn’t argue with you about many of them.

It’s possibly because –

You are a very trivial man.

Yes.

I’m not having a go at you because you want a revolution. Many
people want a revolution. But I’m asking you what it would be like.

What’s the scheme, that’s all I’m asking. What’s the scheme? You
talk vaguely about revolution – what is it?

David Cameron says profit isn’t a dirty word; I say profit is a filthy word.
Because wherever there is profit there is also deficit. And this system
currently doesn’t address these ideas. And so why would anyone vote for it? Why
would anyone be interested in it?
Who would levy these taxes?

Government. What used to be a government?

Right. And how would they be chosen?

You're calling for revolution!

There are many people who would agree with you.

The current system is not engaging with all sorts of problems,
yes. And they feel apathetic, really apathetic.

But if they were to take you seriously, and not to vote –

It does make a difference.

Well now you’re being facetious.

You’re not going to solve world problems by facetiousness.

Sometimes.

I’m not having a go at you about that. I’m just asking you why we
should take you seriously when you’re so unspecific about what –

Well, you don't think that it's possible as human beings they’re
simply overwhelmed by the scale of the problem?

I mean like, mate, this is what I noticed when I was in the Houses of
Parliament: it’s decorated exactly the same as Eton, it's decorated exactly the
same as Oxford, so a certain type of people goes in there and thinks, “Oh, this
makes me nervous,” and another type of people go in there and go, “This is how
it should be.” And I think that’s got to change now.
You don’t really believe that.

Ed – I mean Ed Miliband wasn't elite.

He did, but he then went to a comprehensive school in north
London.

Because by the time somebody comes along you might think it worth
voting for, it may be too late.

Aren’t you bored? Aren’t you more bored than anyone? Ain’t you been talking to
them year after year, listening to their lies, their nonsense? Then it’s this
one gets in, then it’s that one get in, but the problem continues? Why are we
going to continue to contribute to this facade?
I’m surprised you can be facetious when you’re that angry about
it.

Do you see any hope?

If we can change things, why wouldn’t we? Why is that naive? Why is that not my
right because I’m an actor? I mean, I’ve taken the right. I don’t need the right
from you. I don’t need the right from anybody. I’m taking it.
