http://www.correntewire.com/russell_brand_vs_jeremy_paxman_the_full_transcript

Well, I suppose like a person who’s been politely asked by an
attractive woman. I don’t know what the typical criteria is. I don’t know many
people that edit political magazines. Boris [London mayor Boris Johnson], he
used to do one, didn’t he? So I’m a kind of a person with crazy hair, quite a
good sense of humor, don’t know much about politics – I’m ideal.

Yeah, no, I don’t vote.

Well, I don’t get my authority from this pre-existing paradigm
which is quite narrow and only serves a few people. I look elsewhere for
alternatives that might be of service to humanity. Alternate means, alternate
political systems.

Well, I’ve not invented it yet, Jeremy. I had to do a magazine
last week. I’ve had a lot on me plate. But I say, but here’s the thing you
shouldn’t do. Shouldn’t destroy the planet, shouldn’t create massive economic
disparity, shouldn’t ignore the needs of the people. The burden of proof is on
the people with the power, not people like doing a magazine for a novelty.

Well, I imagine there are sort of hierarchical systems that have
been preserved through generations –

Well, you say that, Jeremy, but –

It’s quite narrow, quite a narrow prescriptive parameter that
changes within the –

Well, I don’t think it’s working very well, Jeremy, given that
the planet is being destroyed, given that there is economic disparity of a huge
degree. What are you saying, there’s no alternative? There’s no alternative?
Just this system?

You don’t have to listen to my political point of view. But it’s
not that I’m not voting out of apathy. I’m not voting out of absolute
indifference and weariness and exhaustion from the lies, treachery, deceit of
the political class that has been going on for generations now and which has now
reached fever pitch where you have a disenfranchised, disillusioned, despondent
underclass that are not being represented by that political system, so voting
for it is tacit complicity with that system and that’s not something I’m
offering up.

Well, I’m trying to.

(laughs) I don’t think it works. People have voted already and
that’s what’s created the current paradigm.

Never.

No. Do you think that’s really bad?

Well, I was busy being a drug addict at that point, because I
come from the kind of social conditions that are exacerbated by an indifferent
system that really just administrates for large corporations and ignores the
population that it was voted in to serve.

No, no, no. I’m saying I was part of a social and economic class
that is underserved by the current political system and drug addiction is one of
the problems it creates. When you have huge underserved, impoverished
populations, people get drug problems, and also don’t feel like they want to
engage with the current political system because they see that it doesn’t work
for them. They see that it makes no difference. They see that they’re not
served. I say that the apathy –

Jeremy, my darling, I’m not saying – the apathy doesn’t come from
us, the people. The apathy comes from the politicians. They are apathetic to our
needs. They’re only interested in servicing the needs of corporations. Look at
where – ain’t the Tories going to court, taking the EU to court, it's because
they’re trying to curtail bank bonuses? Is that what’s happening at the moment
in our country? Isn't it?

So what am I gonna – tune in for that?!

The planet is being destroyed, we are creating an underclass,
we’re exploiting poor people all over the world, and the genuine legitimate
problems of the people are not being addressed by our political class.

They are true.

Well, how come I feel so cross with you? It can’t just be because
of that beard, it’s gorgeous.

And if the Daily Mail don’t want it, I do! I’m against them. Grow
it longer. Tangle it into your armpit hair.

What do you think I am, trivial?

A minute ago you were having a go at me because I wanted a
revolution; now I’m trivial. I’m bouncing about all over the place.

Well, I think what it won’t be like is a huge disparity between
rich and poor where 300 Americans have the same amount of wealth as the 85
million poorest Americans, where there is an exploited and underserved
underclass that are being continually ignored, where welfare is slashed while
Cameron and Osborne go to court to defend the rights of bankers to continue
receiving their bonuses. That’s all I’m saying.

I think a socialist egalitarian system based on the massive
redistribution of wealth, heavy taxation of corporations, and massive
responsibility for energy companies and any companies exploiting the
environment. I think they should be ta– I think the very concept of profit
should be hugely reduced. David Cameron says profit isn’t a dirty word; I say
profit is a filthy word. Because wherever there is profit there is also deficit.
And this system currently doesn’t address these ideas. And so why would anyone
vote for it? Why would anyone be interested in it?

I think we do need to, like there needs to be a centralized
administrative system, but built on –

Yes, well maybe call it something else. Call them like the
adminbots so they don’t get ahead of themselves.

Jeremy, don’t ask me to sit here in an interview with you in a
bloody hotel room and devise a global utopian system. I’m merely pointing out
that the current –

Yeah! Absolutely. Absolutely. I’m calling for change. I’m calling
for genuine alternatives.

Good!

Yes.

Yeah, they shouldn’t vote, they should – that’s one thing they
should do, don’t bother voting. Because when it reaches – there’s a point – see
these little valves, these sort of like little cozy little valves of recycling
and Prius and like you know turn up somewhere, it stops us reaching the point
where you think, "I see, this is enough now." Stop voting. Stop pretending. Wake
up. Be in reality now. Time to be in reality now. Why vote? We know it’s not
going to make any difference. We know that already.

So like I have more impact at West Ham United cheering them on,
and they lost to City, unnecessarily, sadly.

Well, facetiousness has as much value as seriousness. I think
you’re making the mistake of mistaking seriousness for the –

We’re not going to solve them with the current system! At least
facetiousness is funny.

Yeah, yeah, sometimes, Jeremy. So, listen. So let’s approach this
optimistically. You’ve spent your whole career berating and haranguing
politicians, and then when someone like me, a comedian, goes, “Yeah, they’re all
worthless, what’s the point in engaging with any of them?,” you seem to have a
go at me because I’m not poor anymore. Well, I'm sorry –

You don’t have to take – well, firstly, I don’t mind if you take
me seriously. I’m here just to draw attention to a few ideas. I just want to
have a little bit of a laugh. I’m saying there are people with alternative ideas
that are far better qualified than I am and far better qualified, more
importantly, than the people that are currently doing that job, because they’re
not attempting to solve these problems. They’re not. They’re attempting to
placate the population. Their measures that are currently being taken around
climate change are indifferent, will not solve the, will not solve the problem.

Not really, well possibly it might be that, I mean, but that’s
all just semantics really, whether they’re overwhelmed by it or tacitly
maintaining it because of habitual – I mean like, mate, this is what I noticed
when I was in the Houses of Parliament: it’s decorated exactly the same as Eton,
it's decorated exactly the same as Oxford, so a certain type of people goes in
there and thinks, “Oh, this makes me nervous,” and another type of people go in
there and go, “This is how it should be.” And I think that’s got to change now.
We can no longer have erroneous, duplicitous systems held in place unless it’s
for the serv– only systems that serve the planet and serve the population of the
planet can be allowed to survive. Not ones that serve elites, be they political
or corporate elites, and this is what’s currently happening.

Oh, I completely believe it. Don’t look at me all weary like
you’re at a fireside with your pipe and your beard. (laughs)

Well, he went to the same primary school as Boris, though, didn’t
he?

Well, that's very good. That’s all well and good. But what I’m
saying is that within the existing paradigm the change is not dramatic enough,
not radical enough. So you can well understand public disturbances and public
dissatisfaction when there are not genuine changes and genuine alternatives
being offered. I say when there is a genuine alternative, a genuine option, then
vote for that. But until then, pfffft, don’t bother. Why pretend? Why be
complicit in this ridiculous illusion?

I don’t think so because the time is now, this movement is
already occurring, it’s happening everywhere; we’re in a time where
communication is instantaneous and there are communities all over the world. The
Occupy movement made a difference in – even if only in that it introduced to the
popular public lexicon the idea of the 1% versus the 99%. People for the first
time in a generation are aware of massive corporate and economic exploitation.
These things are not nonsense and these subjects are not being addressed. No one
is doing anything about tax havens. No one is doing anything about the political
affiliations and financial affiliations of the Conservative Party. So until
people start addressing things that are actually real, why wouldn’t I be
facetious? Why would I take it seriously? Why would I encourage a constituency
of young people that are absolutely indifferent, to vote? Why would we? Aren’t
you bored? Aren’t you more bored than anyone? Ain’t you been talking to them
year after year, listening to their lies, their nonsense? Then it’s this one
gets in, then it’s that one get in, but the problem continues? Why are we going
to continue to contribute to this facade?

Yeah, I'm angry. I am angry. Because for me it’s real. Because
for me it’s not just some peripheral thing that I turn up once in a while to a
church fete for. For me, this is what I come from, this is what I care about.

Remember that – yeah, totally, there’s gonna be a revolution,
it’s totally going to happen. I ain’t got even a flicker of doubt. This is the
end. This is time to wake up. I remember I seen you in that program where you
look at your ancestors and you saw the way your grandmother would have to brass
herself or had to have got fucked over by the aristocrats who ran her gaff, and
you cried because you knew that it was unfair and unjust. And that was, what was
that, a century ago? That’s happening to people now. I just come from a woman
who’s being treated like that. I just been talking to a woman today who’s being
treated like that. So if we can engage that feeling, instead of some moment of
lachrymose sentimentality trotted out on the TV for people to pore over
emotional porn, if we can engage that feeling and change things, why wouldn’t
we? Why is that naive? Why is that not my right because I’m an actor? I mean, I,
I’ve taken the right. I don’t need the right from you. I don’t need the right
from anybody. I’m taking it.


