
TONY 
No. We accept there are all sorts of things we still have to do - to take each
one of those things in turn. There are more doctors than when we came to power.
There are about 17,000 more nurses. Crime is down 10%, burglary down 25%. I
would say, we don't say we've done everything. We've made a start, we've laid
foundations.


We made a specific pledge on waiting lists. And we said we'd start to put right
the rebuilding of a National Health Service where it depended on need. And as a
result we've actually got some 17,000 more nurses and more doctors.


I don't think we underestimated the task.


We didn't.


We made it clear we couldn't do everything in the first term.


If you look at the full text, we made it clear...


It is in the manifesto. We made a specific pledge, to get the waiting lists
down by 100,000. We have achieved that pledge, but it is plain that we have
to... It is plain that it was never going to be done overnight. Of course it
will take time.


No. We do have to rebuild the National Health Service. We are doing it.


What we said was that we will rebuild the National Health Service. And that is
precisely what we are doing.


We made it absolutely clear to people. The pledge we gave on health was a
pledge that we would reduce waiting lists by 100,000. By no stretch of the
imagination could you say that is every problem the National Health Service
dealt with. We never pledged incidentally in the last manifesto a single extra
nurse, but we have provided 17,000 more.


We didn't commit ourselves to providing any extra doctors or consultants but we
have.


We certainly made a start on it. Incidentally, before you leave that, I made it
absolutely clear throughout that we could not accomplish it all in one term.


No, I didn't say we were committed to that.


You did say...


The first Comprehensive Spending Review comes to an end 2003/4 and then you
have the next three-year period after that.


Yes. I made it clear again - because this refers to an interview on the Frost
programme - we could only do that provided the economy remains strong.


Exactly.


Assuming the strength of the economy. I can't write the Comprehensive Spending
Review now.


It's what I said at the time. You probably have the words...


..Of what I said, you will see that I said that, provided the economy remains
strong, then we should be able to reach the European average. And incidentally,
if we do that, we will only be able to achieve the changes we want to the
health service if we accompany it by far-reaching reform. Money is not all it
needs.


No, I didn't say unless there was an economic collapse, I said provided the
economy carried on being strong. I wasn't saying there would be a collapse.


It is. It stands to reason that obviously you can't sit down and work out your
spending plans now. But it is our objective to reach the European average, and
it is our objective to carry on not merely raising health service spending but
education spending as well. Which is why the choice in the election is so
stark. The Conservatives are saying £20 billion worth of cuts and we're saying
keep the investment going.


I certainly do believe that, yes.


It's sensible in public services to set out a longer term perspective, which is
why we have for health, education, transport and so on.


No, I don't accept that. The reason we've been able to get so much money going
into the health service and schools now, why we have forward investment plans
for schools, hospitals, crime, transport, is because we have had a strong
economy and because of two other things which are absolutely vital. The first
is a reduction of the national debt, which is reduced interest payments on
debt. We were paying out more on interest payments on debt than on the school
system when we came in. We're now spending £10 billion more on schools.
Secondly, because unemployment is down, there are fewer benefit claimants. Many
people have moved into work through programmes like the New Deal, and so we
have saved several billion pounds like that as well.


Well, you can spend more money provided you have a) a strong economy, and b)
you are making sure that you are not spending on the costs of economic and
social failure. You referred to my manifesto at the last election. I think it
was the opening point of the 10-point contract - was spending less on the bills
of social and economic failure and more on investment in education.


You have a very good example with the PFI programmes on both school and
hospital building. They have been successful - we have built the hospitals on
cost and on time. That is one example. Another example is in winter pressures.
This year, particularly, we have been prepared to use the private sector where
the public sector doesn't have enough facilities to do so.


Mm-hm.


No, I am not talking about more of the same but building on what we have done.
But that is not the only thing about the health service plan that is important.
The plan is also important, for example, breaking down the demarcations between
nurses and doctors and consultants. I see no reason why nurses can't prescribe
more medicines, do some of the jobs that doctors or consultants have
traditionally done. There are doctors already in this country today providing
some of the minor surgery, consultants reorganising the entire way they work.


In the health service?


No, I don't think so. The trouble with the fund-holder system was you had a
two-tier system.


That is a classic example of a change that's not to do with the private sector,
but the primary care trusts which bring together groups of local GPs and
others, they are able far more effectively to organise their system and get
decent health care for people. By 2004 , they will handle something like 75% of
the entire NHS budget. That is a hugely radical change, but it is not in fact
dependent on the relationship with the private sector. Having said that, I see
no reason why you shouldn't break down barriers between the public and private
sector and the voluntary sector.


I have given you an example - the private finance initiative for schools and
hospitals is an example of the private and public sector working together.


I am not in love with the private sector. I simply believe in getting the job
done by the most appropriate means.


That was about pushing through change in the public sector and of how difficult
it is. But if you talk to a big private sector manager who pushed through
change there, they would find it difficult there. What I was talking about was
the nature of change. It is difficult. Let me give you an example. With when we
started off with the literacy and numeracy strategy, we had a lot of opposition
from teachers and others. The teachers have done brilliantly, we have put
through that strategy and we have the best ever primary school results the
country has seen. So change can be difficult. There are people - some of the
complaints of doctors, for example, relate to NHS Direct or the walk-in
centres, where people can come in and get immediate access to decent health
care.


And I'm not in love with the private sector, I just believe that where you can
use the private sector, use it.


In what sense do you mean?


I think they can be if they are monopoly profits, which is why we taxed the
privatised utilities, got the exess profits and put that to work in the New
Deal. But I don't believe that if you are acting in a competitive market, that
it's the job of government to come along and tell a company - you are making
too much profit.


I don't really - it is not - no, it's not a view I have. Do you mean that we
should cap someone's income? Not really, no. Why? What is the point? You can
spend ages trying to stop the highest paid earners earning the money but in an
international market like today, you probably would drive them abroad. What
does that matter? Surely the important thing is to level up those people that
don't have opportunity in our society.


The person who earns £34 million, if they're paying the top rate of tax, will
pay far more tax on the £34 million than the person on £34,000.


I know and what I am saying to you is the rate is less important in this
instance than the overall amount of tax that people would pay. You know what
would happen, if you go back to the days of high top rates of tax. All that
would happen is that those people, who are small in number actually, and you
can spend a lot of time getting after the person earning millions of pound a
year, and then what you don't do is apply the real energy where it's necessary
on things like the children's tax credit, the Working Families Tax Credit, the
minimum wage, the New Deal, all the things that have helped people on lower
incomes.


When you say where is the justice in that, the justice for me is concentrated
on lifting incomes of those that don't have a decent income. It's not a burning
ambition for me to make sure that David Beckham earns less money.


A lot of those figures are based on a couple of years ago before many of the
measures we took came into effect. But the lowest income families in this
country are benefiting from the government. Their incomes are rising. The fact
that you have some people at the top end earning more¿


If they are earning more, fine, they pay their taxes.


It is acceptable for those people on lower incomes to have their incomes
raised. It is unacceptable that they are not given the chances. To me, the key
thing is not whether the gap between those who, between the person who earns
the most in the country and the person that earns the least, whether that gap
is¿


It is not acceptable for poor people not to be given the chances they need in
life.


I know it's not your question but it's the way I choose to answer it. If you
end up going after those people who are the most wealthy in society, what you
actually end up doing is in fact not even helping those at the bottom end.


No, it's not what I am saying. What I am saying is that my task is¿


But I don't think that is the issue¿


It may be the question. The way I choose to answer it is to say the job of
government is make sure that those at the bottom get the chances.


Because I choose to answer it in the way that I'm answering it.


I am answering it. What I am saying is the most important thing is to level up,
not level down.


What I am saying is the issue isn't in fact whether the very richest person
ends up becoming richer. The issue is whether the poorest person is given the
chance that they don't otherwise have.


Yes, I know what your question is. I am choosing to answer it in my way rather
than yours.


I am.


I am answering actually in the way that I want to answer it. I tell you why I
want to answer it in this way. Because if you end up saying no, actually my
task is to stop the person earning a lot of money earning a lot of money, you
waste all your time and energy, taking money off the people who are very
wealthy when in today's world, they probably would move elsewhere and make
their money. What you are not asking me about, which would be a more fruitful
line of endeavour, is what are you doing for the poorest people to give them a
boost.


Why don't we talk about the poorest of society and what we are doing for them.


Fine.


So are a lot of things, so is capital gains tax


Because I am not entering into a situation where we start writing a budget.


Because the specific manifesto pledges we made last time on income tax we have
repeated.


Yes, but if we end up going through each of the reliefs¿


We are. We are making precisely the same tax pledges in our manifesto as we did
last time.


What Gordon Brown was asked was about the abolition of the national insurance
ceiling in the context of the 1992 shadow budget. I have been asked this
question ad nauseam in the campaign and what I have answered is that we have
not clobbered higher tax earners, we have no intention of doing so. But if you
start on national insurance, then you are on to inheritance tax¿


I know but that's where you would end up. What I can't do is sit here and write
a budget, I am afraid.


They shouldn't.


Because we are not writing a budget now. We have a record of four years to
stand on where we haven't done any of these things. Indeed, we have been
careful to make sure that the highest income earners are not put at risk or
their incentives reduced. I have no intention of going back on that now.


No, it's not intellectually incoherent, you are simply choosing what you will
and won't say.


No, they wouldn't, because you could go through 250 different reliefs and I
can't sit here and write a budget.


You are.


I know but if I give you answers on national insurance and write the budget on
that, why not move on to capital gains tax, inheritance tax, corporation tax,
another 250 different reliefs.


You wouldn't overrule them, it would be a collective decision of government.


Of course they are, cos they're the Treasury.


No, the Treasury¿ When they say they're the custodian of the test, obviously as
the Treasury, they are going to decide - are those tests in a technical sense
met, and the collective decision of the government will be whether they are met
or not.


No, Gordon Brown doesn't¿ Again, I have been over this. The whole of the
government takes a collective decision. When we say the Treasury¿


The Treasury are the custodians of the tests and it's obvious why they should
be. In circumstances where there are economic conditions and economic tests,
it's right that we make it clear to people that there is not going to be any
political fiddling about with these tests, they have to be met in a genuine
economic way.


The judgment is made by the government as a whole but of course Gordon will
make the judgment with me and make it on the basis of the government as a
whole.


No. What it means is what it says. The Treasury are the custodians of the tests
and that is to make it clear to people that these are not going to be
politically interfered with. They have to be economically sound. But the
decision as to whether to recommend entry into the euro has obviously got to be
taken by the Government as a whole. I was asked this question a couple of weeks
ago - are you going to be involved? Well, of course.


No. I am not saying that and neither is he.


The Treasury, because they are economic tests, the Treasury are the custodians
of these tests, obviously, to make sure that it's not simply done on a
political basis but is a genuine economic decision. The decision then, the
judgment as to whether we recommend entry into the euro, is taken by the
government as a whole. Gordon, who has been a brilliant Chancellor, I have no
doubt at all, will make sure those tests are properly adhered to.


I haven't said that, Jeremy.


I have not made that judgment yet.


For the reasons I gave at the time.


Which were that people had been misled and whether it was inadvertent or not,
it was right, he felt and I felt, that he should go.


I said at the time that Peter went that I was sure that the inquiry would find
that he had done absolutely nothing improper at all.


I don't think it was a case of him misleading me. As a result of answers that
were given, people were misled. That chapter is closed.


Well, I am sorry but you are wrong. The reasons I gave are the reasons that are
still valid.


I said at the time I believed he had done nothing improper.


For the reason I gave at the time - that people had been misled and it was
right that, in those circumstances, he went. It was a tough decision and a
harsh decision.


Because Keith Vaz didn't have anything to do with misleading people. The
Hammond inquiry found he had acted, not merely had he not acted improperly, but
he had acted entirely properly throughout. So it would have been grossly unjust
to have dismissed him.


He has been an excellent European minister, and it's sad that the moment the
Hammond inquiry found those allegations were unproven, the media moved on to
other allegations. It is difficult for him in circumstances where people aren't
prepared to look at whether the allegations are proven or not. I believe that
strongly.


He has been.


I am not reshuffling on any basis, Jeremy. The election has not happened.


I totally agree with you. That's why Keith Vaz is still a minister, or was
still a minister until parliament was dissolved.


Because I told you at the time it wasn't to do with the Hinduja passports. So
when you say to me was there something corrupt in relation to the Hindujas? No,
there was not.


I said at the time it was not in respect of that. I said at the time of the
Hammond inquiry, that that indicated that no-one had acted improperly in
relation to passports. Which is why the stuff about the Hindujas was all
nonsense. They were given their passports properly and not even that quickly,
and as the inquiry found, no-one did anything wrong.


I am comfortable with them. They are leading members of the Asian community,
and you say "this cloud"¿


I didn't take money from them at all. They did donate money, as the Hinduja
Foundation has donated money to many causes in this country. I'll just say in
relation to the so-called shadow hanging over them, that is in relation to
allegations that, to the best of my recollection, are something like 20 years
out of date.


My party hasn't taken money from them.


I don't believe it would be right for us to take money from people except in
circumstances where we are satisfied that that is appropriate. But, as a matter
of fact, we haven't taken any money from them.


No. We haven't taken any money from them.


I don't think it was a mistake to launch my first campaign in a school.


I tell you what I thought. The thing I did think was - I hoped people would pay
attention to what I was saying. That was a naive view because they didn't in
the end.


No, I don't believe it was a mistake to launch in a school. It was sensible and
people should pay attention to what we said, rather than whether there was a
stained glass window behind me or girls in the front row of the audience or
not.


No. There are far more important issues in the campaign than that.


I certainly saw the comical side in the newspapers the next day. But then you
have to have a sense of humour in my business.


I didn't know that he had done.


It would be unjust if he did.


I think that¿ How many days are we from the election? Three days from the
election? It's unwise for me to speculate as to whether I will have this job
after Thursday.


Well, and certainly not to start speculating who my successor may be. I have
said on many occasions he is in my view one of the most brilliant people in
British politics, he has done a fantastic job as Chancellor. It is not an
ignoble ambition to be prime minister of this country. But as he says and I
say, let's win the election.


I don't make him sound like anything, I simply say what I've always said.


I don't feel any sympathy for what he is putting forward. The Conservatives
basically learned nothing from the defeat in ¿97. They are putting forward
policies for massive cuts in public investment, for return to¿ Hang on! You

I sympathise with anyone who is leader of the Conservative Party. I don't
sympathise with somebody putting forward policies that I believe¿


Not just that I don't agree with but that I genuinely think damage the country.
Their policy on Europe, which hasn't received much scrutiny, is one that would
have this country on the exit door for Europe. A policy of cutting a quarter¿


You are talking about the choices in the election. Just as you are the
interviewer, I am supposed to give the answers. The answer is that it is
actually important to defeat the Conservatives in this election because the
policies they are standing for, like taking a quarter of university budget
away, are policies worth defeating.


I haven't got any majority yet. I have not and will not speculate.


Not this election.


I am not speculating on the majority because I don't have one. You guys in the
media can speculate about it.


I know what you are asking me. I am not getting into the business of predicting
majorities. Or saying whether I think this majority is right or that majority
is wrong. Any politician in my position, going into an election campaign, is
out and hungry for every piece of support. I am asking for the support because
I believe in the policies I am putting forward. You people in the media can
speculate on the size of the majority. The opinion polls can and the bookmakers
can. But it's the public who is the boss. They will making the decision. We
should leave it to them to make the decision on the basis of what they believe.


You are not putting that question forward seriously?


That I should sit here...?


We don't have any majority yet!


Exactly which is why let's talk about the issues instead of this stuff about -
is the majority going to be this or that when we haven't got one.


There is a danger if people don't come out and vote for what they believe in. I
hope they vote for that.


Surely the single biggest question in a democracy is to get people to vote for
what they believe in. The idea the Conservative Party can come along, every
strategy having failed in this campaign, their campaign useless because they
have lost all the arguments on policy, and say to the public we can't think of
a good reason for voting for us, but please Labour might win on Friday, so lend
us your vote and give us a bit of a shot. It is unbelievable they should come
forward with that. You asked me if I felt sorry for William Hague. I feel sorry
for people leading the Conservative Party in its present state, but I don't
feel sorry for people putting forward the policies they are putting forward. If
the public want us to put that money into schools and hospitals, if they want
us to strengthen the economy - come out and vote for it. Don't vote for the
Conservative Party out of sympathy, when they are going to reverse the very
policies people support.

