http://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/105763

Mr. President, My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The bomb attack on the Grand Hotel early this morning was first and foremost an
inhuman, undiscriminating attempt to massacre innocent unsuspecting men and
women staying in Brighton for our Conservative Conference. Our first thoughts
must at once be for those who died and for those who are now in hospital
recovering from their injuries. But the bomb attack clearly signified more than
this. It was an attempt not only to disrupt and terminate our Conference; It was
an attempt to cripple Her Majesty's democratically-elected Government. That is
the scale of the outrage in which we have all shared, and the fact that we are
gathered here now—shocked, but composed and determined—is a sign not only that
this attack has failed, but that all attempts to destroy democracy by terrorism
will fail.
I should like to express our deep gratitude to the police, firemen,
ambulancemen, nurses and doctors, to all the emergency services, and to the
staff of the hotel; to our ministerial staff and the Conservative Party staff
who stood with us and shared the danger.
As Prime Minister and as Leader of the Party, I thank them all and send our
heartfelt sympathy to all those who have suffered. [end p338]
And now it must be business as usual. We must go on to discuss the things we
have talked about during this Conference; one or two matters of foreign affairs;
and after that, two subjects I have selected for special
consideration—unemployment and the miners' strike.
This Conservative Conference—superbly chaired, and of course, our Dame P.
HunterChairman came on this morning with very little sleep and carried on
marvellously,—and with excellent contributions from our members, has been an
outstanding example of orderly assembly and free speech. We have debated the
great national and international issues, as well as those which affect the daily
lives of our people. We have seen at the rostrum miner and pensioner, nurse and
manager, clergyman and student. In Government, we have been fulfilling the
promises contained in our election manifesto, which was put to the people in a
national ballot.
This Government, Mr. President, is reasserting Parliament's ultimate
responsibility for controlling the total burden of taxation on our citizens,
whether levied by central or local government, and in the coming session of
Parliament we shall introduce legislation which will abolish the GLC and the
Metropolitan County Councils.
In the quest for sound local government, we rely on the help of Conservative
councillors. Their task should never be underestimated and their virtues should
not go unsung. They work hard and conscientiously in the true spirit of service
and I pay special tribute to the splendid efforts of Conservative councils up
and down the country in getting better value for money through greater [end
p339] efficiency and putting out work to competitive tender. This is
privatization at the local level and we need more of it.
At national level, since the General Election just over a year ago, the
Government has denationalized five major enterprises, making a total of thirteen
since 1979. Yesterday, you gave Norman Tebbit a standing ovation; today, our
thoughts are with him and his family.
Again and again, denationalization has brought greater motivation to managers
and workforce, higher profits and rising investment, and what is more, many in
industry now have a share in the firm for which they work. We Conservatives want
every owner to be an earner and every earner to be an owner.
Soon, we shall have the biggest ever act of denationalization with British
Telecom and British Airways will follow; and we have not finished yet. There
will be more to come in this Parliament.
And just as we have stood by our pledge on denationalization, it is our pride
that despite the recession, we have kept faith with 9 million pensioners and
moreover, by keeping inflation down, we have protected the value of their
savings. As Norman Fowler told the Conference on Wednesday, this Government has
not only put more into pensions, but has increased resources for the National
Health Service. Our record for last year, to be published shortly, will show
that the Health Service today is providing more care, more services and more
help for the patient than at any stage in its history. That is Conservative care
in practice. And I think it is further proof of the statement I made in Brighton
in this very hall two years ago—perhaps some of you remember it—that the
National Health Service is safe with us. [end p340]
Now Mr. President and Friends, this performance in the social services could
never have been achieved without an efficient and competitive industry to create
the wealth we need. Efficiency is not the enemy, but the ally, of compassion.
In our discussions here, we have spoken of the need for enterprise, profits and
the wider distribution of property among all the people. In the Conservative
Party, we have no truck with outmoded Marxist doctrine about class warfare. For
us, it is not who you are, who your family is or where you come from that
matters. It is what you are and what you can do for our country that counts.
That is our vision. It is a vision worth defending and we shall defend it.
Indeed, this Government will never put the defence of our country at risk.
No-one in their senses wants nuclear weapons for their own sake, but equally, no
responsible prime minister could take the colossal gamble of giving up our
nuclear defences while our greatest potential enemy kept their's.
Policies which would throw out all American nuclear bases—bases which, mind you,
have been here since the time of Mr. Attlee, Mr. Truman and Winston
Churchill—would wreck NATO and leave us totally isolated from our friends in the
United States, and friends they are. No nation in history has ever shouldered a
greater burden nor shouldered it more willingly nor more generously than the
United States. This Party is pro-American.
And we must constantly remind people what the defence policy of the Opposition
Party would mean. Their idea that by giving up our nuclear deterrent, we could
somehow escape the result [end p341] of a nuclear war elsewhere is nonsense, and
it is a delusion to assume that conventional weapons are sufficient defence
against nuclear attack. And do not let anyone slip into the habit of thinking
that conventional war in Europe is some kind of comfortable option. With a huge
array of modern weapons held by the Soviet Union, including chemical weapons in
large quantities, it would be a cruel and terrible conflict. The truth is that
possession of the nuclear deterrent has prevented not only nuclear war but also
conventional war and to us, peace is precious beyond price. We are the true
peace party. And the nuclear deterrent has not only kept the peace, but it will
continue to preserve our independence. Winston Churchill 's warning is just as
true now as when he made it many many years ago. He said this: “Once you take
the position of not being able in any circumstances to defend your rights
against aggression, there is no end to the demands that will be made nor to the
humiliations that must be accepted.” He knew, and we must heed his warning.
And yet, Labour's defence policy remains no Polaris, no Cruise missiles in
Britain, no United States nuclear bases in Britain, no Trident, no independent
nuclear deterrent.
There is, I think, just one answer the nation will give. No defence—no Labour
Government.
Mr. President, in foreign affairs, this year has seen two major diplomatic
successes. We have reached a detailed and binding agreement with China on the
future of Hong Kong. It is an agreement designed to preserve Hong Kong's
flourishing economy and unique way of life and we believe that it meets the
needs and wishes of the people of Hong Kong themselves. [end p342]
A few weeks ago, the unofficial members of the Executive Council of Hong Kong
came to see me. We kept in touch with them the whole time and they frequently
made journeys to No. 10 Downing Street as the negotiations with China proceeded.
We were just about to initial the agreement and we consulted them, of course,
about its content. Their spokesman said this: he said that while the agreement
did not contain everything he would have liked, he and his colleagues could
nevertheless recommend it to the people of Hong Kong in good conscience—in good
conscience. That means a lot to us. If that is what the leaders of Hong Kong's
own community believe, then we have truly fulfilled the heavy responsibility we
feel for their long-term future.
That agreement required imagination, skill, hard work and perseverance. In other
words, it required Geoffrey Howe.
And in Europe too, through firmness and determination, we have achieved a
long-term settlement of Britain's budget contributions, a fair deal for Britain
and for Europe too. And if we had listened to the advice of other party leaders,
Britain would not have done half as well. But patient diplomacy and
occasionally, I confess, a little impatient diplomacy, that did the trick.
Also, we have at last begun to curb surplus food production in the Community.
Now, we know that for some farmers this has meant a painful adjustment and we
are very much aware of their difficulties. Their work and their success are a
great strength to our country. Michael Jopling and his colleagues will continue
to fight to achieve a fair deal for them.
We have also won agreement on the need to keep the Community's spending under
proper control. The Community can now enter on a new [end p343] chapter and use
its energies and influence to play a greater part in world affairs, as an
example of what democracies can accomplish, as a very powerful trading group and
as a strong force for freedom.
Now, Mr. President, we had one of the most interesting debates of this
Conference on unemployment, which we all agree is the scourge of our times.
To have over 3 million people unemployed in this country is bad enough, even
though we share this tragic problem with other nations, but to suggest, as some
of our opponents have, that we do not care about it is as deeply wounding as it
is utterly false. Do they really think that we do not understand what it means
for the family man who cannot find a job, to have to sit at home with a sense of
failure and despair? Or that we do not understand how hopeless the world must
seem to a young person who has not yet succeeded in getting his first job? Of
course, we know, of course we see, and of course, we care. However could they
say that we welcome unemployment as a political weapon? What better news could
there be for any Government than the news that unemployment is falling and the
day cannot come too soon for me.
Others, while not questioning our sincerity, argue that our policies will not
achieve our objectives. They look back forty years to the post-war period, when
we were paused to launch a brave new world; a time when we all thought we had
the cure for unemployment. In that confident dawn it seemed that having won the
war, we knew how to win the peace. Keynes had provided the diagnosis. It was all
set out in the 1944 White Paper on Employment. I bought it then; I have it
still. My name is on the top of it. Margaret H. Roberts. One of my staff took
one look at it and said: “Good Heavens! I did not know it was as old as that!”
[end p344]
Now, we all read that White Paper very carefully, but the truth was that
politicians took some parts of the formula in it and conveniently ignored the
rest. I re-read it frequently. Those politicians overlooked the warning in that
Paper that government action must not weaken personal enterprise or exonerate
the citizen from the duty of fending for himself. They disregarded the advice
that wages must be related to productivity and above all, they neglected the
warning that without a rising standard of industrial efficiency, you cannot
achieve a high level of employment combined with a rising standard of living.
And having ignored so much of that and having ignored other parts of the formula
for so much of the time, the result was that we ended up with high inflation and
high unemployment.
This Government is heeding the warnings. It has acted on the the basic truths
that were set out all those years ago in that famous White Paper. If I had come
out with all this today, some people would call it “Thatcherite” but, in fact,
it was vintage Maynard Keynes. He had a horror of inflation, a fear of too much
State control, and a belief in the market.
We are heeding those warnings. We are taking the policy as a whole and not only
in selected parts. We have already brought inflation down below 5%;. Output has
been rising steadily since 1981 and investment is up substantially. But if
things are improving, why—you will ask—does unemployment not fall?
And that was the question one could feel throughout that debate, even though
people know there is always a time lag between getting the other things right
and having a fall in unemployment. Why does unemployment not fall? [end p345]
May I try to answer that question?
Well, first, more jobs are being created. As Tom King pointed out, over the last
year more than a quarter of a million extra jobs have been created, but the
population of working age is also rising very fast as the baby boom of the 1960s
becomes the school-leavers of the 1980s; so although the number of jobs are
rising, the population of working age is also rising, and among the population
of working age a larger proportion of married women are seeking work, and so you
will see why we need more jobs just to stop unemployment rising and even more
jobs to get it falling.
Now, on top of that, new technology has caused redundancy in many factories,
though it has also created whole new industries providing products and jobs that
only a few years ago were undreamed of.
So it has two effects: the first one redundancies, the second and slightly
later, new jobs as new products become possible. This has happened in history
before.
A few days ago I visited York, where I saw the first railway engine, Stevenson's
“Rocket” . I thought of the jobs, the prospects and the hope that the new steam
engines and the railways then brought to many people. Communities queued up to
be on a railway line, to have their own station. Those communities welcomed
change and it brought them more jobs.
I confess I am very glad we have got the railways, but if we were trying to
build those same railways today, I wonder if we would ever get planning
permission—it sometimes takes so long. And that is one thing that can sometimes
delay the coming into existence of jobs.
That was one example from history, but let us go through during my lifetime as
we have this same phenomenon, redundancies from new technology more jobs from
new technology. [end p346]
In the 1940s, when I took a science degree, the new emerging industries were
plastics, man-made fibres and television. Later it will be satellites, computers
and telecommunications, and now it is biotechnology and information technology;
and today our universities and science parks are identifying the needs of
tomorrow. So there are new industries and new jobs in the pipeline.
I remember an industrialist telling me, when I first went into business—and I
have always remembered it— “Our job is to discover what the customer will buy
and to produce it.” And in Wrexham the other day, at a Youth Training Centre, I
was delighted to see a poster saying “It is the customer that makes pay days
possible.” So those young people are not only learning new technology; they were
learning the facts of business life and how we create new jobs. Because it is
the spirit of enterprise that provides jobs. It is being prepared to venture and
build a business and the role of Government in helping them to do that? It is in
cutting taxes; it is in cutting inflation; it is keeping costs down; it is
cutting through regulations and removing obstacles to the growth of small
businesses. For that is where many of the new jobs will come from—small
businesses. And it is providing better education and training.
The Youth Training Scheme, now in its second year, was set up to give young
people the necessary skills for the new technologies and the necessary approach
to industry. A majority of the first year's graduates are getting jobs. A much
bigger proportion of those leaving the Youth Training Scheme are getting jobs
than of those which left the Youth Opportunities Scheme, and so they should,
because it is a much better training scheme and it will improve again this year.
I was very interested in it. David Young started it and [end p347] I offered to
take a trainee for our office at No. 10 Downing Street. We would love to have
one. Now, he or she might not have made it to be Prime Minister in one year, but
the work at No. 10, because we have a staff, obviously, to run the office, of
about a hundred, is varied and interesting and we really wanted to take on a
trainee, and we also said we would take some trainees into the other parts of
the Civil Service. So we were not willing [sic]; we were really welcoming this
person or people and looking forward to it.
At first, the union said yes, then they said no, and the result is that young
people have been denied training places.
The same problem arose at Jaguar. First the union said yes, then they said no.
So 130 unemployed teenagers have been denied training, and that means young
people were denied jobs.
Mr. President, we cannot create jobs without the willing cooperation not only of
employers but of trade unions and all of the workforce who work in industry and
commerce as well.
Yesterday, in the debate, we were urged to spend more money on capital
investment. It looks a very attractive idea, but to spend more in one area means
spending less in another or it means putting up taxes. Now, in Government, we
are constantly faced with these difficult choices. If we want more for
investment, I have to ask my colleagues in Cabinet: “What are you going to give
up or you or you? Or you or you?” Or should I perhaps ask them: “Whose pay claim
are you going to cut, the doctors, the police, the nurses?” I do not find many
takers, because we have honoured the reviews of pay for doctors, nurses and the
police and others in full. And you would not have cheered me if we had not done
so and quite right too, but I am bringing this to you because although people
can say the way to solve [end p348] unemployment is to give a higher capital
allocation, I have to say what are we going to give up or I have to turn to
Nigel Lawson and ask him which taxes would he put up. Income tax? The personal
income tax is already too high. Value Added Tax? Well, I should get a pretty
frosty reception from Nigel and I should get a pretty frosty reception from you.
But I would be loth to ask him anyway.
But you see, governments have to make these difficult choices, because as you
know, whether your own households or whether your own businesses, there is a
certain amount of income and you are soon in trouble if you do not live within
it.
But what I want to say to you is that we do consider these difficult choices in
the public expenditure annual round and we are just coming up to it, and we have
managed to allocate a very considerable sum to capital investment. Indeed, we
have found the money for the best investment projects on offer and believe you
me, it has been because of very good management in each and every department. It
has been cutting out waste so we could make room for these things and be certain
that we could say to you that we were getting value for money.
Let me just give you a few examples of some of the investment projects for which
we have found money, by careful budgetting.
There is the M25 road for example. It is being completed. British Railways have
been given the green light to go ahead with electrification, if they can make it
pay. We have started or built forty-nine new hospitals since 1979. Capital
investment in the nationalized industries as a whole is going up. Of course, we
look at those things like new power stations and in a year after drought we look
at things like more investment in the water supply industry. So we are going
ahead with major capital investment. [end p349]
So what is the conclusion that we are coming to? It is the spirit of enterprise
that creates new jobs and it is Government's task to create the right framework,
the right financial framework, in which that can flourish and to cut the
obstacles which sometimes handicap the birth of enterprise, and also to manage
our own resources carefully and well.
That is more or less what that Employment Policy White Paper in 1944 said, so
let me just return to it, page 1. It is getting a bit old.
“Employment cannot be created by Act of Parliament or by Government action
alone. The success of the policy outlined in this Paper will ultimately depend
on the understanding and support of the community as a whole and especially on
the efforts of employers and workers in industry.”
It was true then, it is true now, and those are the policies that we are
following and shall continue to follow, because those are the policies that we
believe will ultimately create the genuine jobs for the future. In the meantime,
it is our job to try to mitigate the painful effects of change and that we do,
as you know, by generous redundancy payments and also by a Community Enterprise
Scheme, which not only finds jobs for the long-term unemployed, but finds them
in a way which brings great benefits to the communities. And then, of course,
where there are redundancy schemes in steel and now in coal, the industries
themselves set up enterprise agencies both to give help to those who are made
redundant and to provide new training. All of this is a highly constructive
policy both for the creation of jobs and a policy to cushion the effects of
change. [end p350]
May I turn now to the coal industry?
For a little over seven months we have been living through an agonising strike.
Let me make it absolutely clear the miners' strike was not of this Government's
seeking nor of its making.
We have heard in debates at this Conference some of the aspects that have made
this dispute so repugnant to so many people. We were reminded by a colliery
manager that the NUM always used to accept that a pit should close when the
losses were too great to keep it open, and that the miners set great store by
investment in new pits and new seams, and under this Government that new
investment is happening in abundance. You can almost repeat the figures with me.
£2 million in capital investment in the mines for every day this Government has
been in power, so no shortage of capital investment.
We heard moving accounts from two working miners about just what they have to
face as they try to make their way to work. The sheer bravery of those men and
thousands like them who kept the mining industry alive is beyond praise. “Scabs”
their former workmates call them. Scabs? They are lions! What a tragedy it is
when striking miners attack their workmates. Not only are they members of the
same union, but the working miner is saving both their futures, because it is
the working miners, whether in Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, Lancashire,
Leicestershire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire, North Wales or Scotland, it is the
working miners who have kept faith with those who buy our coal and without that
custom thousands of jobs in the mining industry would be already lost.
And then we heard—unforgettably—from the incomparable Mrs. Irene McGibbon—who
told us what it is like to be the wife of a working miner during this strike.
She told us of the threats and [end p351] intimidation suffered by herself and
her family and even her 11-year-old son, but what she endured only stiffened her
resolve. To face the picket line day after day must take a very special kind of
courage, but it takes as much—perhaps even more—to the housewife who has to stay
at home alone. Men and women like that are what we are proud to call “the best
of British” and our police who upheld the law with an independence and a
restraint perhaps only to be found in this country are the admiration of the
world.
To be sure, the miners had a good deal and to try to prevent a strike the
National Coal Board gave to the miners the best ever pay offer, the highest ever
investment and for the first time the promise that no miner would lose his job
against his will. We did this despite the fact that the bill for losses in the
coal industry last year was bigger than the annual bill for all the doctors and
dentists in all the National Health Service hospitals in the United Kingdom.
Let me repeat it: the losses—the annual losses—in the coal industry are
enormous. £1.3 billion last year. You have to find that money as tax-payers. It
is equal to the sum we pay in salaries to all the doctors and dentists in the
National Health Service.
Mr. President, this is a dispute about the right to go to work of those who have
been denied the right to go to vote, and we must never forget that the
overwhelming majority of trade unionists, including many striking miners, deeply
regret what has been done in the name of trade unionism. When this strike is
over—and one day it will be over—we must do everything we can to encourage
moderate and responsible trade unionism so that it can once again take its
respected and valuable place in our industrial life. [end p352]
Meanwhile, we are faced with the present Executive of the National Union of
Mineworkers. They know that what they are demanding has never been granted
either to miners or to workers in any other industry. Why then demand it? Why
ask for what they know cannot be conceded? There can only be one explanation.
They did not want a settlement; they wanted a strike. Otherwise, they would have
ballotted on the Coal Board's offer. Indeed, one-third of the miners did have a
ballot and voted overwhelmingly to accept the offer.
Mr. President, what we have seen in this country is the emergence of an
organized revolutionary minority who are prepared to exploit industrial
disputes, but whose real aim is the breakdown of law and order and the
destruction of democratic parliamentary government. We have seen the same sort
of thugs and bullies at Grunwick, more recently against Eddie Shah in Stockport,
and now organized into flying squads around the country. If their tactics were
to be allowed to succeed, if they are not brought under the control of the law,
we shall see them again at every industrial dispute organized by militant union
leaders anywhere in the country.
One of the speakers earlier in this Conference realized this fact, realized that
what they are saying is: “Give us what we want or we are prepared to go on with
violence,” and he referred to Danegeld. May I add to what that speaker said.
“We never pay anyone Danegeld, no matter how trifling the cost, for the end of
that gain is oppression and shame, and the nation that plays it is lost.” Yes,
Rudyard Kipling. Who could put it better?
Democratic change there has always been in this, the home of democracy. But the
sanction for change is the ballot box. [end p353]
It seems that there are some who are out to destroy any properly elected
government. They are out to bring down the framework of law. That is what we
have seen in this strike, and what is the law they seek to defy?
It is the Common Law created by fearless judges and passed down across the
centuries. It is legislation scrutinized and enacted by the parliament of a free
people. It is legislation passed through a House of Commons, a Commons elected
once every five years by secret ballot by one citizen, one vote. This is the way
our law was fashioned and that is why British justice is renowned across the
world.
“No government owns the law. It is the law of the land, heritage of the people.
No man is above the law and no man is below it. Nor do we ask any man's
permission when we require him to obey it. Obedience to the law is demanded as a
right, not asked as a favour.” So said Theodore Roosevelt.
Mr. President, the battle to uphold the rule of law calls for the resolve and
commitment of the British people. Our institutions of justice, the courts and
the police require the unswerving support of every law-abiding citizen and I
believe they will receive it.
The nation faces what is probably the most testing crisis of our time, the
battle between the extremists and the rest. We are fighting, as we have always
fought, for the weak as well as for the strong. We are fighting for great and
good causes. We are fighting to defend them against the power and might of those
who rise up to challenge them. This Government will not weaken. This nation will
meet that challenge. Democracy will prevail.
