https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/16/stephen-fry-bafta-lecture

Oh ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much. I don't know what source John
uses. It was a temporary blip. I have 370,000 more followers than Sarah Brown as
of this morning but I wish her well. My lords, ladies, honoured guests, dears
and darlings, it's an extraordinary honour to be asked to deliver this BAFTA
lecture. Honours of course are responsibilities. They can be poisoned chalices,
they can be vulnerable hostages to a malicious fortune. After all, there is
really no greater honour on earth than being asked to keep goal for England.

There is as far as I know no profession in this country that likes to talk about
itself more than broadcasting. Over the past few years I've been asked if I
might consider contributing to talks, lectures, speeches, panels and other
debates, disquisitions, discourses, diatribes and discussions all over the
country. There is the Dimbleby lecture of course, the MacTaggart in Edinburgh,
the RTS, the Royal Television Society, the BAFTA. There are lectures in colleges
as part of conferences, in-house and out of house. Themes I've had put to me
include programming in the digital age, the future of public service
broadcasting, the commercial sector and its challenges, indies and their
enemies, comedy in the world of compliance, TV and social networking. The list
goes on and on. The film industry doesn't do anything like this on such a scale.
Nor does the music industry or the publishing industry so far as I'm aware.
Maybe it's because talking is what people in television do best. Maybe it's
because television is uniquely in a state of crisis, transition, change and
revolution, or perhaps it's something to do with the desperate sense that
broadcasters have that they need to justify and explain themselves all the time.
Your guess is probably much better than mine as to the reason.

 I am fully and furiously and timorously aware that over the course of the next
 forty minutes or so I might say a thousand harmless, possibly even true, things
 and yet make one hasty or ill-considered remark and it will dog me for weeks to
 come for I am to talk about television, and if there is one thing that the
 newspapers of this country like to pounce upon, it is any breath of criticism
 directed from an insider at broadcasting networks and their executives. It's
 one of the media's favourite indoor sports. Imagine for example that I were to
 heap praise on the hierarchy of the BBC for forty minutes but devote just one
 quarter of one minute to questioning – oh I don't know – Junior Apprentice for
 example, a programme I have never incidentally seen so don't expect me actually
 to remark on it. It's like Krygyzstan. I know it exists but the chances of me
 ever spending any time there are very remote. For all I know however, Junior
 Apprentice sets new standards in intelligent superbly conceived and brilliantly
 executed public service broadcasting. The point is that were I to give just one
 sideways swipe at it, my earlier forty minutes of praise would be ignored. "In
 a withering attack on the BBC and its management, Stephen Fry unleashed a
 devastating criticism of reality programming", or "At BAFTA last night Fry
 launched a personal attack on director general Mark Thompson that had an amazed
 audience of industry insiders reeling in their designer seats", etc etc. You
 get the picture. No matter how circumspect I intend to be, that will happen. I
 suppose I could deliver a lecture so bland, so complimentary, so suffused with
 love, admiration and optimism that even a cultural journalist would be unable
 to read licence fee scepticism or compliance doubt into it but I haven't been
 asked here to be bland and I would be failing in what I suppose I might
 pompously call my duty if I were not at least to attempt to address the issues
 of today in relation to television as I see them but first I have some
 interests to declare.

 You will have to judge how much I am either a sycophantic supplicant, toadying
 to the executives who put bread in my mouth, or how much I am a suicidal idiot
 dumb enough to bite the hands that feed me. Much of my life is spent working
 for broadcasting companies, for networks as Americans call them. I am lucky
 enough to be employed by the BBC and by ITV as a freelance actor, presenter,
 documentary maker and other such figures. Some programmes I'm involved with are
 directly commissioned and made by the broadcasters in-house. Others are pitched
 and produced by independent companies and on that head I must declare another
 interest. I am in the independent production business myself. With my partner
 Gina Carter I founded some years ago a small company called Sprout Pictures and
 a little while later 25% of it was bought by BBC Worldwide with whom we
 therefore have a kind of loose affiliation including a First Look distribution
 deal. All this is public domain and very boring for anyone but some might be
 interested, and you must take whatever comments I have to make in the light of
 that information. I think it only right for me to background it before I begin.
 On top of that I have interests in various start-ups, digital on-line
 start-ups, that might be considered in direct competition to the existing
 broadcasting structures and – how I hate the phrase – business models. So you
 might think I have reason on the one hand to placate and sweeten the executives
 in the traditional television companies, and reason on the other to undermine
 and weaken their very foundations. But I have to declare an even greater
 interest, one that I hope you believe will override any petty business or
 professional interests I might be said to have as an actor or a writer or a
 producer or minor entrepreneur. I have to declare that I love television. I
 love Britain. I'm a patriot, not a nationalist but a patriot. I think
 Clemenceau was asked when he accused someone of being not a patriot but a
 nationalist, what the difference was. He said a patriot loves a country, a
 nationalist hates everyone else's. I am certainly not a blind my country right
 or wrong type of person. Because I love Britain, like most Britons I get
 desperately upset at her failings: when it goes wrong, when it gets it totally
 totally wrong, when it's shoddy, when it's inefficient, incompetent, rude,
 vulgar, embarrassing, when it slips into national torpor or boils into bouts of
 embarrassing national fever. I can moan about health and safety gone mad and
 leaves on the line, rail networks and crap service and crap weather and crap
 sporting achievements and crap politicians and crap newspapers and crap
 attitude. I can do all that. In fact it's the defining signature quality of my
 Britishness to talk like that, to complain and to self-castigate but does it
 mean that I don't love this damned country? Does it mean that I don't get weepy
 when I think of its history, its people, its countryside, its richness, its
 plurality, the cultural and artistic energy, the good humour, tolerance, the
 ability to evolve for good, achingly slow as that ability might be? Does it
 mean that I don't as it were stand to attention when I think of the sacrifice
 of our military, the selfless good of so many working in hospitals and schools
 and rescue services and the million acts of unremembered kindness, decency and
 good fellowship practised every day by unsung heroes and heroines in every walk
 of life? Of course it doesn't mean that I don't love and respect that. One
 carps and one criticises because one loves.

 So we have first and foremost to grow up and recognise that to be human and to
 be adult means constantly to be in the grip of opposing emotions, to have daily
 to reconcile apparently conflicting tensions. I want this, but need that. I
 cherish this, but I adore its opposite too. I'm maddened by this institution
 yet I prize it above all others. I hope it's abundantly clear to all of us that
 only a mad man would question the patriotism of someone who criticises their
 own country, often in the most damning terms. So let it be with television. I
 love television in this country. I love the range and richness of the
 programming. I love its ambition, its scope, its innovation. I love the
 tradition, the technological innovation, the gossip, the corporate drama on the
 inside, the reach and influence on the outside. I admire the talent and the
 commitment of so many working in the field. I love everything about what
 television has been, what it still is and what it might yet be. If I criticise
 anything about it, I hope you will be able to see that I do so as with
 nationhood, from the point of view of love not enmity.

 I grew up in what seems now to me and to most cultural and broadcast historians
 to husly left-wing, trendy, bien pensant and unpatriotic, because radical now
 meant right-wing. Modern and progressive meant consumer-led and
 market-oriented. The Tebbits and the Thatchers of this world were not about to
 allow intellectuals, artists, liberals and Oxbridge nomenclatura of decadent
 self-appointed cultural apparatchiks to decide what was good for the public.
 The nanny state was bad enough in their eyes but the schoolmaster state, the
 don state was even worse.

 And aside from this ideological antipathy and perhaps driving it, a commercial
 opposition to the existing order of things appeared too. Sky TV and BSB started
 fitting satellite dishes and squarials to our roofs and forhe corporation
 lurched from crisis to crisis. There was the Iraq-gate Kelly scandal,
 Queensgate, the Ross Brand scandal, expenses, perceived excesses, lapses and
 errors. At ITV and Channel 4 things were hardly better. Crazed management
 buy-outs, the one billion pound failure of ITV Digital, funding crises, revenue
 stream dry-ups, the death of any serious arts or documentary programming, phone
 line scandals and all kinds of other misfortunes have befallen them. The
 picture elsewhere has been undeniably rosier. BSkyB seems to go from strength
 to strength. Those who criticised Sky TV for being merely a buyer-in of
 American programmes are beginning to have to recognise that the network is now
 a major producer in its own right. Sky Arts has two channels, both also
 available in HD. They have wrenched, yes, plenty of sporting occasions from the
 free to air terrestrials but no one can deny that they have along the way
 revolutionised the quality of sporting commentary, technical representation,
 analysis and depth of coverage. They continue to drive innovation with the
 current move to 3D. The analog switch-off and the continued switch to Freeview,
 Virgin or BSkyB will only bring more and more people to alternative channels.
 The Natural History Unit in Bristol, so long a pioneer and uniquely classy
 outfit in its field, is finding that Discovery and National Geographic are
 slowly learning how to make proper natural history television, and that these
 channels know much more about how to sell worldwide and into the digital
 systems that are proliferating in every other territory in the world. All of
 which means less and less advertising money all round, less and less reach,
 less and less prestige which was the one quality that British television prided
 itself on, authority, kudos, class, quality, excellence, gravitas, prestige and
 whither have they fled? Add to this the growing emergency of Hulu, and Boxee,
 YouTube, Vimio, not as sources of funny clips but both Youtube and Vimio are
 major providers of serious funded channels, channels that produce content. Add
 to that the encroachment of Google and others into demand internet TV services
 and it can be seen that the very notion of a national broadcasting ecosystem
 seems very difficult to maintain, justify or believe in.

 Is television as we know it, in its old business model, in terminal decline?
 Well the big news I have for you is that I have absolutely no idea. It's
 possible to argue that there is no future for the BBC or ITV or Channel 4 or 5
 or any broadcasting network that tries to make television at the national
 parochial level. Hamstrung by remits to cater to domestic interest, what chance
 is there that the BBC or ITV or Channel 4 can ever compete internationally?
 Sport, American drama, movies and comedy will proliferate with occasional
 internationally-owned reality franchises continuing to slot into prime time.
 There is every reason to believe in companies that distribute, sell and
 broadcast television using subscription and the new advertising models but
 there is scant reason to believe in old-fashioned broadcasters, for the fact is
 I am not a writer nor a director nor an actor nor a producer nor a presenter,
 nor any of the things that John introduced me as. These names no longer have
 meaning. I am a content-provider. It is now many years since we were told in
 roaring accents from the masthead of every trade magazine that content was
 king. We were assured that pipelines, conduits, channels, gateways and portals
 were all very well but that they were meaningless without content to funnel and
 distribute. Hard to argue with that. The BBC and ITV are still commissioners
 of, and producers of, a simply gigantic torrent of content. Hundreds and
 thousands and hundreds of thousands of hours of television are required every
 year and still will be, whatever outlets and means of distribution are dreamt
 up by technologists and cunning corporate clever-clogses.

 Now to achieve such a volume of production with any quality, variety,
 originality and confidence does not require good business executives. It does
 not require entrepreneurs. It does not require people who can say business
 model seventeen times in one meeting without blushing. It does not require
 people who can call writers and producers content-providers without wanting to
 shoot themselves in writing embarrassment. It does not require people who have
 gone on courses or people who can tick compliance boxes and fill in risk
 assessment forms. It doesn't require people with degrees in media studies or
 people who know how to multi-task or attend conferences or give lectures. It
 does not require people who either give a toss about what's gone before or
 people who are ignorant of what's gone before. It does not require people who
 are afraid. It requires a confident producer class, and that calls for people
 of real creative talent, intelligence, courage, resource and imagination, for
 my fear is that almost everyone I have encountered in production in the making
 of programmes is afraid. They have much to be afraid of, and much to cage,
 confine, cripple and constrain them. Fear is everywhere in the television
 business in this country. When you are afraid, it is a great deal easier to say
 no than to say yes. I ought to add, I must add that personally I have met with
 nothing but courtesy, kindness, consideration and enthusiasm in the corridors
 of all the major broadcasting companies. I'm not suggesting that I have cause
 to moan, far from it. I'm extremely lucky, very pleased and proud to have been
 able to make television programmes with the support and guidance of superb
 professionals but I do have an idea that may help free the creative talent of
 producers, writers, directors and others.

 It may not be an original idea. For all I know it has been floated and shot
 down in the past. I do know that some of my colleagues in the independent
 sector may think I am mad and suicidal to suggest it. I speak for no one here
 but myself as I raise this balloon. In order to explain the suggestion, I ought
 perhaps to go over what can only be called the business models currently
 pertaining in the market place, in television today, vis a vis independents.
 Let us suppose you are an independent production company and you have an idea
 for a new drama series. You take it to a broadcaster, BBC or ITV say, according
 to how much heft you might have with that company a senior or middling
 executive commissioner, head of a department. If they like your idea they pay
 you what is confusingly called a licence fee for which they get the right to
 broadcast your series on their channel a set number of times. This fee barely
 covers the costs of production but as an independent, you can make more money
 because you keep all the worldwide rights. In other words you can sell your
 series around the globe and the original domestic broadcaster, the BBC or the
 ITV, doesn't get a penny from those international sales. That is the standard
 independent model and has been for many years, and I'm sure many in this room
 are all too familiar with it.

 Well I cannot be the first I suspect to notice an inbuilt problem with that.
 The BBC, and to some extent also ITV and Channel 4, will only commission
 content which is domestically skewed, that speaks to remits of nationhood,
 British interest, British cultural and often extremely regional social
 concerns. That's fine with many programmes. Why would Germany or Peru want to
 buy Watchdog for example, or the almost certainly excellent Junior Apprentice,
 when they can buy or more likely steal the format for themselves and make their
 own version? But this current model means that the broadcasters, the BBC and
 the ITV, have no stake in making films, dramas, documentaries or features of
 international appeal while at the same time the independents who depend upon
 them have a stake in little else. The result is dramas and documentaries that
 have one foot planted in resolutely British soil with the other wobbling and
 hopping and pointing its toes hopefully in the direction of the world. The
 result is indies that are just one commission away from insolvency. The result
 is a feeding frenzy for format over content. We've all seen or read about the
 financial rewards that successful reality and talent shows can offer so
 independents are chasing each other's tails madly in a desire to come up with
 these formats, these empty shells, in the hope ideally that some larger
 independent company will buy them for millions and they can then be saved from
 the difficult delicate and unrewarding business of actual production and making
 of original programming.

 Surely all this talent on the production and technical side, all this talent in
 acting and writing, all this talent in other words for content provision isn't
 to be set aside, put to grass, ignored because content it turns out isn't king
 after all but rather format is. So my sugestion – and it may be that my
 independent production friends will want to burn me at the stake for even
 hinting that such a thing might be desirable – is that broadcasters, the
 networks, take a share in foreign sales. In return for that, they offer larger
 licence fees and naturally accept stories, ideas and – yes if it must be -
 formats that have wider appeal, greater scope, range, ambition and heft. Many
 independents are hanging on by their fingernails and have to take nugatory
 licence fees just to pay for office rental and the intern's Oyster card. Surely
 we can do better than that. Surely we can incentivise both the broadcaster and
 the independent to think bigger, better, richer, and more internationally.
 Surely the commercial sector in particular can only benefit from another source
 aside from advertising being added to their revenue stream. It would take
 negotiation between PACT for the producers, and representatives of the
 independents and of the networks and of government who may need to relax remits
 in order to allow this. It may be that this new model will only be allowed for
 ITV, Sky, UK TV and Channels 4 and 5 etc, and that the BBC will be forced to
 stick to domestic emphasis and be excluded from such a new model. It may be
 that the super indies, the big raptors that are a part of other companies that
 are themselves a part of other companies that are owned by the biggest media
 conglomerates in the world, will try and swoop in and take over the
 negotiations, drowning out the plaintive chirrups from the true little indie
 nests. It may be of course that I am talking nonsense, that I don't understand
 business or broadcasting or anything else. It seems to make sense to me and I
 cannot believe I'm the first person to have thought of it. I suspect it would
 help ITV more than it would help the BBC, for anything that potentially adds
 another source of revenue must seem desirable to that strapped institution. But
 what I fear is that without such a restructuring, British television will lose
 greatly, that any hope there is for real programming, for originality and
 greatness beyond the domestic sphere will dwindle and die, and any hope we have
 that greatness can exist only in the domestic sphere is hopeless when a large
 drama audience is considered to be three million. That is just not possible.

 Well my proposal is a modest one and perhaps a forlorn and a foolish one. I
 don't pretend to be a businessman. Spreadsheets and Powerpoint presentations
 make me want to scream, gouge out my eyes and stab my ears. I have never been
 able to read a profit and loss account or a balance sheet, and I go swimmy and
 feel sick if I have to read a legal document because on the whole I'd rather
 watch television. Thank you!
